you could say i've talked about
continents fairly regularly on this
channel
and if you've really been paying
attention i'd say you're familiar with
the fact that people can't seem to agree
on how many of these the earth
actually has in school i was taught that
there were one
two three four five six seven though
some of you might have been taught that
there's a six
or six and some people on youtube sure
seem to like talking about
an eighth but i think the big takeaway
from all of this
is that the term continent is rather
vague and any way we decide to divvy up
land will always be a little arbitrary
but if that leaves you a little
unsatisfied don't worry you're in good
company which is why in search for a
more definitive answer to what's
ultimately an unanswerable
question some people have turned to
plate tectonics which is just kind of a
mess
what with all these little weird plates
in between the big ones and so on
others have done even worse and tried to
use cultures in doing so giving
themselves the impossible task
of drawing straight lines through the
murky divisions between
groups of people and then there are some
absolute fools who will say screw it
let's just start from scratch and see
where we get
and yet here we are no closer to any
sort of definitive
answer and honestly maybe even a little
bit more confused
but okay what if we did something really
crazy and say looked at the distribution
of plants and
animals across the world to see if
there's any way to define continents
through their native
biology well it just so happens that my
friends that is the beginning of
biogeography
now lucky for us someone has already
gone through the trouble of dividing the
world into seven biogeographic
realms many of which line up nicely to
our preconceived notions of
continents unlucky for us in order to
actually understand why
these are the way that they are we can't
just look at how things are today
but rather we need to look much further
back in time to see how past biology and
past geography shaped our present
biogeography
or in other words we first need a lesson
in paleobiogeography
so buckle up while life has been found
on this planet for over 3 billion years
we only need to look back
200 million years to a time when all the
continents of the world had come
together into a single
super continent pangaea this is an ideal
time and place for us to start because
having all major land masses physically
connected
allowed both plant and animal species to
freely and completely disperse across
any lands they found suitable briefly
creating an
original all-encompassing realm the
pangea under which all terrestrial life
was included
while the biology of the pangea realm
may have looked vastly different from
what we're used to today
it would be from this initial melting
pot of a gene pool that all subsequent
terrestrial life would delineate from
the most recent common ancestor so to
speak
this era of interconnectedness came to
an end as the tethos seaway began
widening splitting the supercontinent
into two
roughly equal land masses larasia and
gondwana sending the biota of each new
continent off on their own unique
evolutionary trajectory
contained within larasia was north
america europe and well most of asia
while gondwana was a conglomerate of
south america
africa india australia oh yeah and
antarctica
from this point on the populations
between the two continents effectively
couldn't
mix allowing for two distinct
biogeographic realms to emerge
the arctic and the tropic being centered
at a much higher latitude laresia was
periodically exposed to
much lower average temperatures placing
an evolutionary pressure on the plants
and animals here to develop cold hardy
bodies or else
offered extinction to any species that
couldn't keep itself
warm a good example of how this pressure
manifested itself would be in the pine
genus or as the fancy scientists would
call the penis genus
having evolved on larasia some 130
million years ago pine trees quickly
distributed themselves across the
continent which is why
even if we look at a modern distribution
map for pine trees we'll see they
still exhibit a luration distribution
only growing in lands that once belonged
to the arctic realm
this environmental stress also affected
animals making cold-blooded species less
capable
of surviving here while consequently
giving warm-blooded animals like mammals
the advantage
this explains why it was here that the
planet witnessed a huge diversification
of
mammals into the laresha theria a whole
branch of mammals specific
to lurasia which consists of many of the
animals we're most familiar with today
included in this development was
perisodactyla or odd-toed undulates like
horses donkeys tapers and rhinoceros
artiodactilla or the
even toad on gillette which holy crap
includes even more popular animals like
all camellids pigs ruminants like
giraffes deers antelopes cattle sheep
goats etc all the way to hippopotamus
and even cetaceans
rodintia which yeah are all rodents and
carnivorous which can be further divided
into feline and canine try to figure out
what kinds of animals fit into those
categories
however just like its predecessor as
laresia aged it too
began to break apart with the central
atlantic rift cutting a line between
europe and
greenland effectively splitting the
arctic realm in two
on one side the pale arctic the paleo in
reference to this being considered by
many to be part of the old world
on the other side the new arctic or the
new world arctic
altogether the shared natural history of
these two realms explains why basically
all flora and fauna across north america
has a direct analog to be found across
eurasia and vice versa
this similarity in biology was only
reinforced with the periodic
reconnection of
asia to north america across the bering
strait allowing further exchange between
these seemingly distant lands
okay so that's two out of the seven
biogeographic realms meaning that the
remaining five
all came from the breakup of gondwana
having stayed as a whole much closer to
the warmth of the equator evolution on
gondwana took its own path one that was
less influenced by temperature
resulting in a flora and fauna better
adapted to tropical climates hence the
title tropic for this realm
and so just like how the laresia the
area developed on
eurasia here the gondwanath area began
to emerge as well
notably it was around 70 million years
ago that the first
true primates evolved to somewhere in
the center of
africa by this time gondwana had already
begun splitting apart meaning primates
weren't able to fully distribute
themselves and instead were only able to
reach
south america and india this explains
why the modern distribution of
primates minus humans of course looks
like this reflecting a late gondwanan
dispersal
as gondwana broke up even further so too
did the tropical realm
south america and africa became the
largest fragments causing the
gondwanatheria to diverge into the
xenarthra
and the afrotheria signifying the two
continents becoming their own distinct
biogeographical realms in the process
the neotropic and the afrotropic
from an assortment of common ancestors
south america ended up with animals like
the sloth
anteaters and the armadillo while the
afrotheria became things like aardvorks
hydraxes and
tinrics without any of the arctic
megafauna this left room for larger
herbivores to emerge from these groups
so in south america common sloths were
free to speciate into the enormous
ground
and aquatic sloths anteaters became well
giant
anteaters and the armadillo family
diversified into glyptodonts
in africa the same thing happened where
a relative of the hyrax
started growing bigger and bigger losing
most of its hair while its nose got much
longer giving birth to the order probasa
dia the only surviving member of which
being the
elephant at one point a relative of the
elephant even began living aquatically
first staying within the shallows
presumably using its trunk as a sort of
snorkel but eventually fully adapted to
the water
and speciated into cyrenia becoming
dugongs and manatees
africa however never fully escaped the
reach of lurasia having reconnected with
asia approximately 30 million years ago
this opened up the two lands for
exchange with many of the larasian
mammals coming down into africa filling
the continent with even and odd towed
ungulates felines and canines and so on
relatives of the elephants also managed
to make their way into the paley arctic
adapting to the cold conditions by
growing bigger and regrowing thick fur
resulting in mammoths mastodons
stegodantidae and moetherium by using
the bering land bridge these species
were even able to enter the knee arctic
realm explaining how a genus originating
in africa made it all the way to north
america
overall due to its more recent
connection to eurasia the north of
africa has largely been colonized by
species of the pale arctic
so much so in fact that it is now
included as part of that
realm as many of the species we
associate most with africa
lions rhinos zebras giraffes hyenas all
got their evolutionary start in the
arctic realm
the afrotropic was still partially
preserved however thanks to the sahara
desert retaining its primates and most
of its plant species and even produced
us humans which as we all know went out
from the afrotropic to extensively
colonize
every other realm on earth south america
on the other hand remained isolated from
about 80 million years ago
until about 20 million years ago when
the panamanian land bridge began to
reach out from north america to join the
two continents together
this kickstarted what's known as the
great american interchange a mixing of
endemic species that continues to this
day
this wasn't a fair and equal fusion
however as i already mentioned prior to
this recombination north america has
been sporadically reconnected to asia
through the bering land bridge
this not only brought the new arctic and
the paley arctic realms temporarily back
together but later this also meant
african and indian influences reached
all the way to north america
the effect of this was that only the
most competitive animals prevailed
across
these related realms stacking the knee
arctic with far
more robust species when compared to
those hosted in neo-tropical isolation
and so when these two realms collided
many of the unique and specially adapted
species of south america were replaced
by the more generalist species of the
north
incoming undulates like camellids
entered and evolved into llamas and
alpacas
felines came here to diversify into
jaguars and cougars and even rodentia
spread from north to south growing to
sizes never before attained by rodents
like capybaras and
maras all the while helping to push
native animals like a ground sloths and
glyptodonts into extinction but this is
also where the lines really start to
blur
as plants don't exactly follow the same
rules
as animals so while knee arctic animals
were more successful
overall at invading the neotropic the
tropical climate of central america gave
a localized edge
to advancing neo-tropical plants the
result of which being plant communities
of south american origin coming to
dominate all the way up to mexico where
both
the climate and therefore the flora
begins transitioning to new arctic
an interesting effect of this is that
even though new arctic animals may be
more
widely adaptable in terms of animals
especially adapted for tropical
rainforests those of the neotropic still
reign supreme allowing other neotropical
animals to infiltrate deeper into north
america and pushing the line of the
neotropic as far
north as the central american
rainforests would reach
overall this makes the whole of
mesoamerica a tremendous transitional
zone filling countries like mexico with
some of the most diverse collections of
flora and fauna to be found
anywhere in the world a similar process
of recombining realms can be found when
looking at
india you see india broke from gondwana
approximately 130 million years ago and
spent 80 million years adrift in the
middle of what would become the
indian ocean similar to south america
this isolation bred a very unique biota
and soon enough a distinct
indian realm came about one derived from
the greater tropical realm
primates especially had a field day
having come about only 70 million years
ago their only route to colonizing india
would have been a random rafting event
meaning it was likely only a
single primate species that found its
way aboard this leaving ship
but over the next 50 million years this
common ancestor would come to diversify
into a number of species what would
become gibbons macaques and
langers this isolation didn't last
however and around 50 million years ago
india came into contact with southern
asia opening up a new arena for pale
arctic and index species to interchange
the only difference here is that while
yes mixing did occur the arrival of
india also led to the building of the
himalayas which
served as the world's biggest barrier
for traversing plants and
animals while these mountains shielded
most of india preserving much of the
indian realm
an opening was left going through
southeastern asia leading to a fusion of
indian and malayan species
the result being the modern day realm of
indo-malaya
this is all made slightly more
complicated by the fact that only a few
thousand years ago lower sea levels
brought much more of the melee
archipelago
above the ocean forming the sunderland
this opened an avenue for indo-malayan
flora and fauna to expand as far as this
shelf reached and remain here even after
rising sea levels turned much of the
region back into scattered islands
why the indo-malayan realm doesn't
include all of these islands however has
to do
with australia also once belonging to
gondwana a joint australia and
antarctica broke apart from the
supercontinent at roughly the same time
that india did
the two southern continents remained
attached in isolation for another 40
million years together forging a new
australic realm
rewind a bit and it was approximately
100 million years ago that the first
marsupials evolved in modern-day north
america
from here they migrated south possibly
using the caribbean islands to colonize
south america while subsequently going
extinct further north
south america remained attached to
antarctica by its southern tip
until around 30 million years ago giving
marsupials a pathway to expand further
but it was also around this time that
the southeast indian ridge started
breaking the continents apart
literally sending antarctica to the
shadow realm while australia got lucky
and pushed further northward
right in the middle of this about 50
million years ago when the two
landmasses weren't
too far removed yet a single marsupial
managed to raft over to
australia where it found a land devoid
of most other mammals on account of the
continent's isolation without any
mammalian competition marsupials had
finally found the one place where they
could become the dominant animals of the
realm
this dominance allowed these single
ancestral species to diversify into a
variety of forms and
functions with herbivores like kangaroos
koalas and wombats and
carnivores like quals tasmanian devils
and thylacines
the australic realm of course included a
lot more different animals but hey it's
easier to talk about specific examples
than to mention every single living
thing that found its way here
but as time went on the australian
landmass went through some changes
losing zealandia while building up mass
towards its front that would become new
guinea as well as surrounding islands
these islands would come to share in the
biology of australia in the process
forming the australasian realm
but as these land masses pushed further
and further north they eventually came
into close proximity with the indonesian
islands and by extension the
indo-malayan realm
so despite on a surface level appearing
to be part of the same archipelago there
are in fact
two distinct groups of islands here
separated by every biogeographer's
favorite
line the wallace line defining the
border between indo-malaya
and australasia of course as we should
all know by now
there are no straight or clear lines in
nature and as a result of their
proximity a new interchange has
kick-started between the two realms as
plants and animals crossed the narrow
waterways between islands blending
species from both realms together
okay that's it right we're done oh yeah
and then there was antarctica
i'm pretty sure we all know how this one
ends so i'll try to make this fast
despite starting as the southernmost
component of gondwana for the longest
time antarctica was a highly habitable
land and
enjoyed a golden age brought about by
the global greenhouse climate of the
earth at the time
during this period it would have closely
resembled neighboring australia which
stayed connected until about 100 million
years ago finding its spot at the south
pole by around 80 million years ago
even at the bottom of the planet
antarctica remained warm enough
for life to thrive for another 30
million years or so
in this time antarctica's biology likely
diverged
substantially from gondwanan and even
australian biology to the point where a
new biogeographic realm was
realized the antarctic realm but as we
all know the planet began to cool as it
entered a new ice age
just 3 million years ago and nowhere on
earth was affected more by this change
than antarctica
year after year temperatures steadily
dropped soon enough ice began to build
up and didn't stop
building until the whole continent was
under literal miles of ice extinguishing
virtually all native antarctic life in
the process
putting the wide scale extinction aside
though the true shame of this is that
all the fossils left behind now lay
buried under miles of ice meaning
whatever unique biology
that could have developed here before
the freeze remains utterly hidden and
unknowable to us now leaving
antarctica's paleobiology as a huge
blind spot within the field
altogether this leaves the earth with
one two three
four five six seven distinct terrestrial
realms
well actually i didn't want to bring
this up in the beginning but there's
actually a little bit of an
eighth realm and no it's not zealandia
but it's actually not that far off
either
you see if you watched my earth's lost
land masses video you'll know that the
pacific ocean is the site of a lot of
new land building processes
both as a result of tectonic uplifts and
continuous volcanism constructing
islands entirely independent of
all other lands on earth with no natural
history to draw from
each newly created island must build
their own distinct flora and faunas from
whatever
seeds birds or the tides may bring over
being situated within the pacific ocean
which covers a third of the planet's
surface means the islands of the pacific
are perfectly situated to receive inputs
from nearly
all of the biogeographic realms save for
the afrotropic
what's been created is a fascinating
laboratory where
all sorts of different combinations
between realms can take place
producing a unique array of biology on
every single island
if this wide range of potential inputs
wasn't enough once these castaway
species reached their final island
destinations from here they set off on
their very
own journey of evolutionary exploration
one that's defined by whatever peculiar
environmental conditions are harbored
therein
in turn it is these island dwellers that
are most active in seeding whatever new
islands might arise within the pacific
volcanic arena
what this all means is that while this
prismatic gene pool makes it impossible
to generalize the oceanic realm
it nonetheless constitutes in and of
itself a distinct biota connected
through a disconnection to
any others universal in its
uncategorized ability
hawaii is a fascinating case study of
all of these principles at work
not only does the hawaiian island chain
represent the largest islands within the
realm but also some of the most
isolated being 3 700 kilometers from the
nearest continental lands of california
part of the new york deck 5300
kilometers from pale arctic lands 8 500
kilometers from the indomalangan realm
6400 kilometers from australasia and
8400 kilometers from the neotropic
despite being located closest to north
america prevailing ocean currents lead
the waters of the northern pacific to
circulate counter-clockwise
acting as a conveyor belt delivering
material from all over the ocean to
these islands
this explains why when analyzing the
plant species present and
deciphering their realm of origin it was
found that indo-malaya was the greatest
source of native hawaiian plant species
having supplied
21 percent of hawaiian flora despite
being the furthest away
the new arctic was the second most
influential that's unsurprising
supplying 19 percent
what's really interesting however is
just how much was contributed by
other areas east asia was next
contributing 17
of native hawaiian species the neotropic
supplied
12 and even 9 percent originated from
far away
australasia if you're following along
and doing the math in your head you'll
find that there's still about 22 percent
of the hawaiian gene pool that's
unaccounted for
and this is truly where the eighth
biogeographic realm comes into play
as all of the islands of the pacific
also receive influx from all of the
other islands of the pacific
and it's estimated that an additional 11
percent of the hawaiian gene pool comes
from
other pacific islands this leaves a
final 11
of native hawaiian species with unknown
origins
because while figuring out the natural
history of things like this can be
extremely tricky
but consider this in the last 400 000
years a new island has begun forming off
the southeastern edge of hawaii
forming the loewy high seamount while
luihai remains 975 meters
under water today with an average growth
rate of 5 meters per millennia
at some point over the next 200 000
years a new island will breach above the
ocean
once this occurs sure louie high will
receive inputs from all around the
pacific but the most
immediate donor will of course be the
other hawaiian islands
what this appears to suggest is a chain
of donation from one island to the next
in perpetuity and looking at how far
back the hawaiian islands
stretch we begin to see the potential
for a lineage passed
down from island to island to island all
the way to the present
it's possible that this inherited
hawaiian biota may in fact be the source
of the remaining
unidentified 11 percent of species
native to the islands
altogether what i hope this has shown is
that the islands of the pacific
share an ineffable quality that make
them unlike anywhere else on earth
uniting them into a single patchwork
realm oceania
and so there you have it that's the
seven or eight realms of biogeography
so what do you think is this a better
way to divide and talk about our world
compared to the six or seven or eight
continents or
are you still unconvinced well either
way let me know by leaving a comment and
if you enjoyed this trip into the world
of biogeography
and would like to see me dive deeper
into the field then don't forget to
subscribe so you don't miss any more
videos i put out
and of course if you want to help
support me in continuing to make these
videos you can head over to my patreon
lastly if you're craving more
biogeography i'd suggest you check out
this video i made recently on the ice
age
thanks